Let's talk about fire base fire store rules.
You probably didn't think about it yet, but wasn't it strange that we were able to read and write to
this chat's collection earlier in this module, before we added authentication and users put in our
words, our Flutter app was able to communicate with this database without an authenticated user.
Now, sure, we did connect our app to Firebase, so there is some connection there.
But what if I would tell you that technically anyone who knew your project ID, let's say, would be
able to talk to your database.
Now, of course, knowing your ID is not something that's that easy, but it's definitely not advisable
to leave your database open like this, even if it's hard to find the exact address.
It would be possible technically.
So instead, you typically want to lock your database down to only your authenticated users because
then only users who were authenticated with your project, which happens through the Firebase SDK only
such authenticated users are able to write to your database and as an extra side effect, you then also
have a clear trace.
Who wrote what?
Now you can configure something like this through that rules tab here in the database area.
Now, Firestone rules are pretty flexible and also pretty not complex, but got a lot of features.
You can view the official docs to learn all about Firebase Rules, and I would strongly recommend that
you do so if you plan on using Firebase in your app because there's a lot you can configure.
Basically every use case is possible.
You can configure that some collection is locked down to a specific user whilst other collections are
open to everyone.
So there's a lot you can configure and therefore the official docs are the place to go if you want to
use Firebase.
This is not a Firebase course, so I will only scratch the surface here.
Generally the rules here are set up here in this rules tab and there is an extra little programming
language you could say the Firebase team invented, which allows you to configure those rules.
In the end, rules work like this.
You have a match string here and you can also have nested match strings like this one which describe
the path to which a request was sent and then the rules that apply for such a request.
Now this is the general request to your database, so you typically leave that unless you know what
you want to do.
But then you have these nested matches here which match individual paths inside of your project.
So for example, if we would want to lock down access to this chat collection and for that I'll open
it in a new tab.
If I would want to lock down access to this chat collection, I could add a new match here.
Let me delete all of that.
I could add a new match here where I say, if we target Chet's and let me add this here in front of
the other match, if we target Chet's, then a new set of rules should apply.
You put your rules for this match between curly braces.
Then and then.
A rule is written like this.
Here you can allow certain kinds of excess.
If you don't match a certain path by default, nothing is allowed.
So if I would remove this match which grants access to all documents in any collection, that's what
this means here.
If I would delete this and I would delete this, then everything would be locked down as a default.
But of course, then even we with authenticated users wouldn't be able to communicate because by default
it's locked down for everyone, including authenticated users.
So I'll bring this back so that we can set the step by step.
So here we now have a new match for chats and after allow you can define what you want to allow.
For example, read and write seperated with commas.
You could also be more specific and say, I want to allow read and I want to allow creating documents.
But deleting and updating would not be allowed.
Right.
On the other hand, is basically allowing, create, update and delete.
So you can really be very granular here.
And then after a colon, you have your condition when this is allowed.
And here, for example, you can access a special request object which is available here in the rules
where you can access the auth information.
And for example, if you say auth unequal to null, you would say if there is some auth information
on the request.
So if the user is authenticated, if this comes from an authenticated user only then such auth information
will be on the request.
Then I want to allow read and write.
So put.
In other words, unauthenticated users would now not be allowed to read and write.
And that's, for example, what I'll now do down there, I will say.
Access to my documents is by default only possible for authenticated users.
And as I just said, this here is a special syntax, which means all documents in all collections.
It's a wild card placeholder, so to say.
Now, of course, I can delete this extra rule because now we got this more general rule down there.
And that is a change that makes sense here.
My opinion.
But actually I don't want to give this general access to everything.
I want to be a bit more granular here.
And for example, I would say it makes sense that we grant access to users, to the user who owns a
document so that not every authenticated user can manipulate any user that's being stored.
And users know you should only be able to edit yourself.
So I only want to grant access to users, or let's say I want to grant right access to users if you
are the user with this ID.
So you can only edit your specific user document.
And that's possible with rules.
You can add a new match and say for the user's collection for user ID, which is of course flexible.
There are multiple IDs.
You can use such a placeholder.
Therefore that basically means for any ID.
We now want to have a rule and there I want to allow writing if request of.
Unequal now.
So if the request comes from an authenticated user and with the double ampersand symbol here, if request
of UUID, which is a field that is available on the off object on the incoming request, is equal to
the UID we have here in the path.
So you can specify placeholders like this in a path and you can then reference them in your condition
if you want to.
And with that, I'm saying only if the incoming request is authenticated and it's authenticated by the
user with the user ID of the document I'm trying to edit only then.
Right.
Access is granted.
On the other hand, I'll say users for any user ID, I want to allow remote access for any authenticated
user, so I'll just check if off is unequal to now.
I don't care if it's the user with the same ID, so the user data can be read by anyone but only written
by the user to whom the ID belongs.
That is one possible rule you could set up here.
Now again, the official docs dive way deeper than that, but this hopefully gives you a feeling for
how this works.
And with that, we can also add an extra a new match here where we target the chess collection and then
any document in there.
And for that, I'll again use this special syntax here with the double asterisk.
This means any nested collection and or any nested document for any such document.
I want to add a new rule and allow reading.
By any authenticated user.
So if request off is unequal to null, anyone should be able to read my chats or any authenticated user
should be able to read everything in chats.
And in addition, every user should be able to create data in there.
For example, new messages that should be possible for every user here.
Now, we can always find you in this later, but this should be a good start.
Now.
You always need to publish your rules after you edit the them and you can also check if they're right
with the rules playground there.
You can send dummy requests which don't really edit the database but basically simulate such an incoming
request and you can simulate, get, create, update and delete requests.
You can also simulate that this comes from an authenticated user and you can also, for example, add
extra authentication data like the user ID.
That's part of the incoming request.
So you can play around with that.
You see what will be part of the incoming request that's being simulated and that should allow you to
validate your rules now.
Well, of course, also see if those rules fail, if we then try to interact with the database, which
we're going to do now with the rules set up, we can now finally continue working on our chat screen
here and make sure that we're able to really send chat messages and read them here as well.